foreign
very good
somewhat of a delay
today
sand off
that's better okay
let me tweak this so if that works
okay let's see how we're going
whether or not this works
um
good
test test test
all right so I just thought I'd try and
do a Twitter live as well as YouTube
simultaneously but I do not know if
um
my competence with the technology is
just there so this is
certainly
a novice trying things out for the first
time
um
all right so I know
so I'm not able to watch anyone just at
the moment until I kind of get things
together
um
all right so let's I'll I'm just going
to uh talk without notes because uh yeah
I've got this new piece of software
which is apparently able to put things
out to YouTube Facebook and Twitter
simultaneously how effectively it's
doing that I don't know if the people in
the YouTube can tell me if um I'm
actually audible
uh let me know that um things are
actually being heard the sound is
actually working then that would be
helpful
um
but otherwise
um what we've been doing recently is um
things that make you go hmm after I
listened to two
um
after I listened to
great I am coming through that's good
fantastic thank you after I listened to
Sam Harris talk to Max tegmark they did
two conversations and it was some years
ago as well and I thought well there's
so much here I mean the the
just the mountain of misconceptions that
kept coming at me
was
phenomenal I mean I guess it's in
retrospect perhaps I heard it when they
first had a conversation years ago and
since then I kind of refined my own
ideas about some of this and so then it
becomes jarring I think I said in one of
the podcasts that you hear these ideas
which are the ideas of the mainstream
you know they're the ideas that the
overwhelmed majority of people
especially intellectuals out there have
and
sometimes if you're outside of that
mainstream and you are more interested
in trying to focus on to be honest
sounds a little bit
highfaluting but more focused upon how
to make progress how to actually solve
the problems rather than being concerned
about how the end is nigh if you're
saturating yourself in that worldview
and looking at the approaches that could
work to solving some of these problems
then when you when you do encounter
people who are saying look how bad
things are and are going to get and
things are going to get worse you are
sometimes working out of your optimistic
Slumber
so I've been I've been enjoying I've
been enjoying sort of um
uh going back to hear some of the
pessimists there was a fantastic article
I don't know if people on Twitter
um saw what I tweeted today retweeted
this article
um
just some fellow's blog actually it's
just some fellow's blog and he wrote
what it would be like if Chomsky Howard
Zina Noam Chomsky had have done a
a a live commentary I sort of our
commentary on the Lord of the Rings
absolutely hilarious stuff I mean if I
could just read a bit so as if they are
as if Chomsky is reflecting on the movie
as he's watching it
commenting on the movie as he's watching
it and talking about all the ways in
which Mordor and Sauron is being hard
done by I just thought that was
absolutely fantastic like this person is
extremely inventive when when Bilbo
Baggins first appears on the screen in
Lord of the Rings
Chomsky of course this is this is a
fictional thing right of course Chomsky
isn't actually doing this but this is as
if he would have what would Chomsky say
as soon as Bargains appears on the
screen Chomsky says and here comes Bilbo
Baggins now to now this to my mind is
where the Story begins to reveal its
deeper truths in the books we learned
that Sarah man was spying on Gandalf for
years and he wondered why Gandalf was
traveling so incessantly to the Shire as
Tolkien later establishes the shire's
soul food of pipeweed is one of the
major reasons for Gandalf's continued
visits Zen you refer the conflict as
being primarily about pipe weed do you
not and so it goes on Chomsky and Zin
casting all the forces of good as
actually being
evil Gandalf as being a warmonger again
office being someone who is conspiring
to overthrow the innocent Orcs and
innocent Sauron and you know
um I just thought that was absolutely
brilliant the way the way that it was
done so
um yeah on my Twitter I linked to that
article well worth reading well worth
reading
but chomsky's one of these people who is
just
the the absolute
um what would we say
King of the pessimists one of the
leaders the the pessimist of pessimists
to some extent I don't know it's
particularly scientifically well
informed but in terms of his politics
everything is the fault of the United
States everything it doesn't matter what
the historical event happens to be there
are somewhere that the United States or
perhaps even Enlightenment values to
some extent are implicated in what's
going wrong now
especially when it comes to
international relations and that kind of
thing Chomsky I should say
is a brilliant linguist
uh one of the things we studied in
philosophy was chomsky's Linguistics
which were a brilliantly insightful way
of approaching Linguistics I don't know
how correct it is I'm not a linguist or
anything like that but he talked about
deep structure and superficial structure
um and a lot of that stuff I found to be
yeah revealing but it's just when he
steps outside of
his own sort of um area of expertise in
particular into things like politics and
international relations it's then the
posit the pessimism begins strangely
enough he actually wrote a book called
optimism which is precisely the kind of
thing one would expect someone who tends
to lean in that kind of dystopian
Master's direction to do to name your
book that is absolutely all about
pessimism called it optimism in the same
way that you know obviously the the
department of propaganda in Orwell's
books is the ministry of truth it's the
same kind of thing going on there
um
my sound is
I'm going to be listening to myself and
getting Echo there
um if anyone has any questions on uh
YouTube
um happy to answer them like I say this
was an experiment just to see if my
software works the only thing I'm not
broadcasting on but which I'm apparently
able to is Facebook so I'm going to save
that for another time this is something
I've seen euron Brook do to great effect
to simultaneously broadcast to a whole
bunch of different streams so maybe this
is something I can try and do I kind of
enjoy doing the live streams because
it's not something
of effort on my part
um
yeah so in in in the recent podcast I'm
going through the the M's the M's and
I've done misconceptions mathematics the
mathematicians misconception today was
the Multiverse uh tomorrow the next day
I'll get to something like metaphysics
we'll do morality and I'll just keep on
going along on this thing Minds is going
to be an important one as well where I
think that there's just these
fundamental misconceptions that crop up
all United by the fact that the people
have the wrong epistemology it is
absolutely astonishing that it's the
epistemology that that does them in
you know Naval talks about this about
how you know if you lack the foundation
to some extent then you're just going to
start making mistakes all over the place
uh in an unavoidable way because you
don't have a good method of error
correction
uh
and if you have that this is what
epistemology amounts to in the papyrian
sense it's a method of error correction
that's the whole point of it
alternative epistemologies do not have
that at their core alternative
epistemologies things like Bayesian
epistemology are about trying to find
the truth or to become more confident in
the truth in the thing that is an actual
description of reality at variations of
the Justified true belief fire to you
this is the objectivist you know people
who talk about objectivism they have
induction at their core and they they
won't be moved on it by the way then
regard papa is some kind of relativist
because they don't understand him as
focusing on error correction David
Deutsch emphasizes their correction as
well and if you're not focused on error
correction If instead what you're doing
is or you might think that you're
focused on error correction because
isn't it equivalent after all isn't it
the same sort of thing to just be
looking for the truth looking for
knowledge that's Justified no it's not
it's not the same kind of thing at all
discarding the false words is not the
same as trying to accumulate the truth
quite a different thing
but it's the difference between the
bucket Theory and the Searchlight theory
of mind the bucket theory is you know
you just put all the facts into your
brain and this is how you learn
and those epistemologies are kind of
like that let's gather up the truth and
fill up our bucket and the more that
we've got in our bucket the closer we
are to the actual truth when really what
we should be doing is we're out there
searching where we've got this and I
think the lights are great analogy
because it it conjures in the mind this
idea of Enlightenment that you can come
to Greater Enlightenment via what method
by error correction and if you're not
focused on that if that's not at the
center of the way in which you approach
knowledge then you're going to go wrong
in all these M ways the M ways of going
wrong and what can mathematics possibly
show well the people who don't have the
correct epistemology about that think
that it's going to get you the absolute
final pristine truth the people who
don't have the right epistemology think
that morality needs to rely upon a firm
foundation the immovable Foundation the
solid epistemological Bedrock that
cannot be moved and of course that way
my leads Dogma that way leads tyranny
that way leads to the the religious
thinking on these kind of things where
once you think you've got the moral
truth then you're going to defend to the
death anyone who might disagree with you
you're going to defend your particular
thesis
it doesn't matter what the domain of
knowledge is this is why I'm
concentrating on the M's you see the
mistakes that creep in because you're
not focused on error correction Minds is
a really interesting one and my mind's
misconceptions about minds
not only reveal that people are pursuing
the wrong kind of recipe so to speak the
wrong kind of way in which to make
progress on AGI if that's what they want
to do
they're completely misguided thinking
that well we need to do it to create
more advanced AI begin to link these
narrow Alli together and once you have
enough linked together you have a broad
Ai and this is explicitly the kind of
thing that tagmark says it's what
Bostrom says it's what Harris believes
in that that all you need is the tasks
that humans are good at enumerated
programmed linked together in some way
and you've got General AI
which is wrong it's a completely
misconceived notion of what a person is
a person is not something that is just
there to complete tasks which is what a
computer does or what an AI does it
completes task it follows instructions
it obeys what you tell it to do and in
fact their concern quite often is that
this thing is going to obey to the
letter so well what you instructed to do
that it won't deviate from that so it's
not only obedient it's super obedient in
a sense it'll just obey the first thing
that you tell it and apparently not
anything subsequent so if you tell it
convert stuff into paper clips then you
can't stop it from doing that or
something like that you know their ideas
as I've explained in the podcast are
literally incoherent in places which is
why it's so disappointing to read
certain philosophers on this and for
them not to pick up on this I guess that
everyone is in the nation stages of
trying to understand it's the most
generous thing I can say about this now
in the nation stages of trying to
understand what this AGI thing is and so
one should expect to be absolutely
surrounded by misconception and error
that said shouldn't you at least try for
logical coherency throughout a book that
you spend ages on
but Boston makes the mistake take my
Maximus taken because they make the
mistake Harris makes a mistake because
he's getting his material from those
guys and similar people who
all seem to be talking to themselves and
talking to each other and just agreeing
on
on what AGI is
and so they go wrong on the AGI because
they're wrong about minds and which
leads into the morality because then
they start to say what a person is and
to get that wrong or what a person is
capable of doing
they get it wrong on alien intelligence
you know someone who I admire in all
other respects someone like Neil
deGrasse Tyson thinks the aliens will
understand the physics that will be
physically incapable of understanding
because their brains will be bigger or
something like that and we won't we'll
be physically okay which is just an
appeal to the supernatural
but on the AGI stuff he's actually very
good he actually admits where you can
just unplug the thing if it starts to go
Haywire if it starts to turn bad turn
evil or something like that
yeah anyway
um ashik asks
Arthur David's talk at the direct medal
in question answers the question is
asked what is physical could you share
your answer with us oh yes and David
says something like it's asking what is
real
the question is kind of asking for a
definition
in a sense you know what is physical
like if you want well you know as a as
someone who follows David deutsche's
worldview what I would say is I'm not
can't give you the final answer on that
the best explanation
is going to include a certain amount of
circularity here and it won't be
revealing for you if I just say to you
that what is physical is what is
material it doesn't help okay because
what is material well it's anything
that's physical
but I would say that a physical thing is
that which can be tested in some way in
our world
mathematical truths are not physical
they're abstract they can't be that
their truth cannot be tested via
experiment but only via proof or
computation independent of what is
happening in uh the physical world
physical world is made out of atoms
they're physical but also the forces
that mediate the interactions between
things like atoms are also physical but
they're not made of atoms then you get
down to the bosons things like well how
does the the electromagnetic force had a
magnetic forces electrical forces
impinge upon matter well that's because
of photons
how has a nucleus kept together well
that's that's a physical Force keeping
the nucleus together uh so that that's
your that's your gluons as the strong
force so all of these things are
physical so far so I'm giving you a list
of things that are physical but then of
course space and time are physical as
well space time is physical but in what
sense Well it can't be that it's they're
made out of matter as far as we know
they're not they're made out of this
fabric which is space-time but what is
that well it's physical we can see its
effects on things so all I can say about
what is physical is and this might sound
so it's like what is life
if you're a little bit too clever by
half you say well life is what
biologists study So Physical stuff is
what physicists study but we can't go
much deeper than that except that
physical stuff is what features in our
best explanations are physics so it's
isomorphic in a way with what we say
about what is real or what exists
what exists and people get very upset
about this
um people haven't thought through the
way in which to answer it you know but
what exists is what appears in our best
explanations of stuff
when you say that something exists X
exists the birds exist
um alien life exists
televisions exist what you're saying is
that there is some explanation of the
world some account of reality that
unavoidably invokes that thing
and when you say something exists what
you're saying is I have an explanation
that such and such exists we can't say
alien life exists or we can say is we
don't know if alien life exists that's
an interesting sort of dichotomy there
it may or may not
so this the claim aliens exist is cannot
be made now that would be a belief that
people would have I would say it's a
rational to say so it's equally
irrational to say annual life does not
exist the only rational perspective at
the moment now in the year 2022
uh modular someone who really has had an
encounter with alien live
I don't think they're such a person
is to say
I don't know that alien life exists we
don't know we don't know anything
regarding that but of everything else
you can only say it either exists or it
doesn't given a good explanation
unicorns don't exist on what basis can I
say that there is no explanation that
requires us to invoke unicorns
the force of gravity does not exist why
because gravity is a consequence of the
curvature of space-time no force is
required and in physics forces are
mediated by bosons and there is no such
graviton you know there's postulated in
in particle physics but yeah
um
so that that would be my to some extent
non-answer what is physical is like
asking uh to some extent what is
abstract
or uh what is material you know you get
down to these sort of Base what what is
number
um
the what is question really is kind of
definitional which means it's either
going to be circular
um or uh just a just a vacuous kind of
claim you know whatever you regard that
something is well what is physical is
material what is material is physical is
that circular yes kind of vacuous as
well you're not you're not learning
anything by by me saying by me just
giving you synonyms uh all we can say is
to give you examples and from that
interestingly enough to abstract out the
truth the knowledge of what is physical
is an abstraction so if I tell you
fundamental particles are physical
space-time is physical energy is
physical well here are examples of
physical things what you abstract out of
that is this is the physical staff
that's what it means for an abstraction
to Exist by the way that you have
different instantiations of it and what
is common among them is that that really
existing thing like when we say in what
sense does the number three have
existence well
you can draw three dots on the paper you
say that represents three the numeral
three you could put six over two you
could say ten take away seven all of
these different ways of representing
that quantity
represent the same quantity what is that
quantity three the abstraction of three
you abstract out of all of those things
that same thing
tennis do you have any thoughts on
Donald Hoffman in these theories I've
written quite Long blog posts if you go
to my website
there
um there's Donald Hoffman the first part
and Donald Hoffman part the second is an
interesting character because
it will put it this way
I've mainly focused on his interviews
and those blog posts that I made which
was the first introduction I had to him
was where Sam Harris and his wife Annika
interviewed interviewed Donald Hoffman
and at first for about the first part of
the interview
half an hour or more
what he said was quite sensible
he was talking I think about
explanations
if I can remember he even said something
extremely sensible which is that if his
theory of everything and his theory of
everything was that um physics is
invented embedded in Consciousness
somehow
okay not utterly crazy I just don't
think that it's an experimentally
testable claim he hasn't
proposed any
predictions that fall out of this all he
keeps on saying which is kind of a
frustrating thing is that he can make it
mathematically precise
that doesn't interest me you can make up
fictional stories that are
mathematically precise that doesn't make
them real
and she told tegmark who says well
everything every mathematical structure
actually exists in some sense
but you can make up axiomatic systems
that contradict each other so that would
mean that you're logically can your
world's out there your logical worlds if
they really exist can contradict
strictly contradict one another another
story
but yeah Hoffman
Begins by making quite sensible noises
about the process of science how science
works and and indeed as I was about to
say
if his theory is true if his theory of
Consciousness is true mathematically
precise Theory Of Consciousness is true
then what should come out of that
is the ability to derive
the uh uh other approximate theories so
things like quantum theory and general
relativity which is exactly right so he
got that right which is good for a
psychologist
in the same way that
if general relativity is correct
or a a closer to uh true description of
reality let's say than what uh Newtonian
gravity is then one should expect that
it will be able to
Newtonian gravity works okay uh
the mass approximation the low velocity
approximation that Newtonian mechanics
happens to be comports with relativity
so long as the the velocities are low
and the mass is low and all that kind of
stuff
so this is the history of science this
is what one should expect that whatever
the successor two quantum theory is is
going to
reveal how quantum theory works and why
it works
now
so Hoffman got that right that his
theory if it was true
or more true correct however you want to
say this the successor Theory to General
relative and quantum theory
that all the physical reality is
embedded in Consciousness in some way
then yeah it should be consistent with
those theories
but I say nothing Nar thing that
suggests there's any experiment that can
do this
that theory
of Hoffman's which is this idea that
our minds and reality indeed itself is
kind of like an operating system then
we're interacting with reality via this
operating system and so he gets what he
gets right is that we are minds and we
are interpreting reality I think it just
takes it a little too far why these
people I've been saying this recently as
well like tegmark and others it can be
very sensible but they want what they
want what they they're grasping for is
the old religious notion that you get to
epistemological bedrock you get to this
final complete Theory and then you're
done and they all want to find it
uh
Eric Weinstein did the same thing it's
like he's gonna not only is he going to
unite to general relativity and quantum
theory
and I don't understand enough about
history I haven't read the thesis I
don't think I could if I tried anyway
but
what are the experimentally predictable
results of this how do we test it first
thing but the other thing is
they all want to make the claim that
this will be the final theory that this
is where progress will stop
that their thing is not merely better
than the currently existing theories but
it will be the final word in some way
and they all make this point
techmark dig did and I think Hoffman did
as well that well if we just accept
the truth of the fundamental nature of
consciousness
the final foundational fundamental
nature of consciousness
then in a sense physics comes to an end
this is this is this will complete
physics
Harris always talks this way you know
you listen to him on his podcasts for
more than about 10 minutes and he talks
about a complete and science of
Neuroscience or
physics whatever it happens to be
um
there can be no completed science
anywhere we are just at the beginning
of understanding in all directions
whether it be life chemistry physics
economics the nature of personhood
morality history was scratching the
surface with these things we should
expect to improve and have ever better
theories and more unifications
as well as more simultaneous splitting
into a narrower more focused disciplines
as well all this is going on
simultaneously with our knowledge with
our learning
we shouldn't expect it to come to an end
and why people have this desire
for it to come to an end I think it's
merely again a result of faulty of
histamology and it actually is a faulty
epistemology that is inherited from a
religious tradition after all God has
the final complete truth out there
and so this is why religion didn't
really get along with science for so
long early on the the beginnings of
science because
why should human beings think their puny
Minds can improve upon the Divine word
of God the final word of God the the the
the the the ultimate explanation that's
there within the book
uh it's hubris isn't it well
[Laughter]
we know better now at least some of us
do it's this unusual situation where
um
where where
the very people who would dismiss
religion as mythical nonsense
because it's appealing to the
Supernatural are the very same people
who invoke a final theory that would
have no explanation
that would knowledge would stop there in
some way shape or form why wouldn't it
have an explanation because it would
just be it why can't you ask what the
explanation for that thing is well you
should be able to if you're not a
supernaturalist if you don't endorse
this idea of the final complete truth
then you should expect progress to
continue
Alex has asked um what's the difference
between a goal and a problem isn't a
goal just a problem we want to solve it
could be
but the traditional way of thinking
about goals is that if you do not
achieve your goals you're a failure in
some way and this is why we make this
distinction sometimes and why indeed the
common way of thinking about how to live
an Inspired Life you know you go to you
don't have to travel very far on Twitter
or Facebook social media these days
people trying to inspire you you know
go to the gym achieve your goals go to
university achieve your goals sit and
meditate for half an hour achieve your
introspection goals um uh you know that
you're supposed to set goals
that's what some people advise life is
supposed to be about this setting of
goals achieving goals and then at the
end when you have achieved the goal you
feel a sense of accomplishment
the difficulty people have with that and
that what I think a papyrian framework
challenges with that view is that
we are not failures if we flat if we
don't achieve our goals and that
achieving a goal can be a coercive kind
of a thing you can think of something
better to do before you get to achieving
that goal and that's perfectly fine
if you have a problem-centered approach
then all you're doing is you're moving
from problem to problem perhaps never
finding solutions to them you're just
changing your mind along the way is that
to say you should just act on a whim all
the time and have absolutely zero
discipline in any way shape or form and
not to be self-controlled all that sort
of stuff no it's not to say that at all
it's just to say that
goals can be good for someone whose life
is utterly chaotic
if you're depressed and you don't know
what to do with your life and you're
you're completely at a at your Wit's End
about
um not getting things done you know lots
of people are in this position of being
in a position where
they know that things aren't working
but they don't know how to get out of
this situation they're in
they're depressed perhaps that not
achieving stuff
things are just generally going wrong
then I think for that person it can be
of some help to set goals and and to
achieve these things
but the underlying problem is they feel
dissatisfaction with life
the the they don't know what to do next
and they have that personal moral
problem morality is about what to do
next and they they might not even know
have a have a damn clue about what to do
next
so for that kind of a person
may as well set a goal may as well set a
goal
and then try and achieve it that that at
least gives them purpose for a moment
but not everyone is in that position
some people can be very engaged with
life have a a bunch of really
interesting things they could be working
on
maybe one of the things is okay they
want to get a little bit more fit maybe
one of the things is they want to earn a
little bit more money maybe one of the
things is they want to read more books
they want to learn they want to achieve
better marks all that kind of stuff yes
I wouldn't suggest for that person they
should be setting goals for each of
these things because precisely because
these are competing goals and in trying
to achieve one you're not achieving the
other and you will feel dissatisfied
that sense of dissatisfaction what we
want to avoid and even the Buddhist
agree with this what you want to avoid
to a large extent is dissatisfaction
with your life with other people just
general feeling of dissatisfaction is is
not always a great position to be in you
want to be content
in your problems but if you're not
achieving goals you may feel
a lack of contentment like you need to
you have this hunger some people thrive
on this kind of feeling so they say but
I think it's a misinterpretation of
their own mental state at times we don't
always know our mental state
so the distinction between goals is
a goal is something that
tends to be followed more slavishly that
tends to be
directed disciplined and a thing that
people can coerce themselves towards
a problem is something that arises each
and every moment
for you and can change and the solution
of which reveals more problems as I like
to talk about a lot uh
the solving of any one problem can
reveal a whole family of problem
children as papa says
but the achievement of a goal is an end
point we have to invent a new goal but
if you have the mindset that's just
problems instead of goals there is no
end point there is no end point there's
problem solution problem solution
problem solution now you might say well
that is goals well you can call it that
fine but then you're just conflating
everything what what do you call the the
thing of achieving something and then
stopping
I don't know
um so it's just it's just a different
way of
um a different perspective on what might
possibly be a similar situation we call
it the problem situation
and you want to everyone has a different
problem situation you're moving from
problem situation too ideally better
problem situations or you're setting
goals and achieving goals
I distinguish between them because one
is
fun
lacks coercion
is open-ended and one is closed requires
coercion and discipline and that kind of
a thing and I should say you know there
are some people out there who whose
entire business model seems to be about
discipline
but I interpret them as not actually
talking about uh discipline in quite the
same way Jocko willink you know I listen
to his podcast all the time uh brilliant
motivation but motivational speaker
um just
has a great understanding of human
psychology a truly um insightful
putting aside all of the the other great
stuff about how to be a man properly
considered I would say
he talks about discipline
you know but it's not you pay attention
and it is not
as you might expect
a military type discipline where you're
just obeying
um because orders have been given
as if it's completely coercive
it's quite the opposite
you listen to how he encourages people
and has them solve their problems he
calls it discipline
but I call it finding the fun in
something
recognizing identifying the problem
realizing where you are and where you
want to get to
in order to solve the problem and what
you have to do about getting there
sometimes I fully admit that there might
be there again there will be people out
there who will
kind of need to self-coerce if they're
stuck if they've got no other option
if you if you're there mired in
depression and a lack of Direction and
you're you're mentally unhealthy so to
speak and scare quotes
then
if you've tried everything else why not
why not try you know being disciplined
being goal oriented for a little while
until you
get to the next level you know it's sort
of like empiricism is part way between
you know you've got people who just
believe in the Supernatural and God did
everything okay that's one level of
knowledge and I'm just going to obey the
authorities kind of thing
and then you've got empiricism which is
an improvement who says you derive
Knowledge from your senses but at least
it's talking about evidence that
knowledge comes with evidence
but above empiricism we have this idea
of knowledge is conjectural that
evidence is crucial in certain ways but
it's just not the way in which we derive
our knowledge so you have these levels
of misconception right at the lowest the
middle and and where we are with what I
would say is preparing epistemology so
too here with goals and problems yeah
you can be a person who is completely
lacking in Direction
one of my friends used to call himself a
ruddlest boat you know he didn't know
what to do after we just came out of
high school it's like he didn't know
what to do with his life he felt like a
rattleless boat
okay so if you're stuck in that position
you don't know what else to do
and being a problem-centered solution
focused person is is a little bit too
abstract for you then yeah
at least better than that
nothing and hating life
might be improved by setting goals so
you're at that level you're at that
middle level you're effectively the
empiricist
but once you've done that once you've
done that for a little while achieved a
few goals and been disciplined for a
while then maybe you'll figure out which
of these things that you've been
disciplined about which of these goals
you've achieved is actually the one that
you really find fun and then you won't
have to coerce yourself you won't have
to set yourself goals and I think that's
the the key Point here is that
once you've really figured out what you
think is fun about reality who the
people are that you want to spend time
with how you find fulfillment moment to
moment
what's the point of goals
you're just doing the thing
that is fun and fulfilling and that your
life is about that's where you want to
get to
and that is not an unproblematic State
it's a it's a state filled with problems
but with better problems
even though you have no goals you're not
going okay I'm aspiring to to that
you're just day-to-day
you know this is obviously a luxury that
not everyone has but people can aspire
to this kind of thing
um
as Sheikh asks
given your answer about the earlier
question about what is physical then
it's the whole subject of metaphysics
simply a mistake well
the clever answer to that is of course
everything's a mistake if physics is a
mistake
um mistaken perhaps a misconception
and it's not a mistake to study it at
all I think metaphysics is very
important
like mathematics like morality the other
M's as well
it's just that I think it's also
important to recognize when you're doing
metaphysics
when when metaphysics is metaphysics
and it's not science
you know that
there is there is a distinction to be
made there
it's useful to have a metaphysics
sometimes
I don't have a preferred metaphysics
what we mean by metaphysics is well or
something that is prior to the physics
some people believe in God I know
physicists who believe in God who think
that's a better explanation for things
like the fine-tuning problem
a fine-tuning problem I've talked about
recently that there appears to be
three-ways to go here
why are the concepts of nature the way
they are why do they have the values
that they do
if the charge on a proton was much
greater than what it was than what it is
then maybe Fusion wouldn't occur and the
entire universe after the big bang would
just be filled with protons hydrogen
nuclei that would never Clump together
and form you know Stars so you wouldn't
have Fusion they'd repel each other
or if
the gravitational constant the the
strength of gravity was any stronger
perhaps
all the hydrogen that was produced
during the Big Bang
would have collapsed into a black hole
and there are many of these constants
right there are many of these constants
that that are so finely tuned
it's one of the most fascinating areas
of of physics is this fine-tuning
problem Luke Barnes on on on Twitter is
I would say if he's not the world's
greatest expert on this he's got to be
up there I mean the the the the sheer
quantity of material that he's produced
on this he's written a book with Garand
Lewis
um called a fortunate universe
um All About precisely this question of
fine-tuning I studied a little bit at
University
um so I understand the basics
um
but you know
the question is okay we have this Pro it
is a problem some people deny it's a
problem you've got Victor stenger who
wrote a book um called the fine-tuning
fallacy Victor Stingers I'm dead now but
um yeah he wrote this book I think just
before he died
um and I managed to consult doing a
project at Uni at the time on
specifically on fine tuning I got in
contact with him he said I just happen
to be writing this book and so I got a
sort of a pre-print of the book which
was which was great and he's his old
argument was it's not a problem right I
won't go into that now
most people accept that it's a problem
it does look like a put up job that the
the universe has these very finely tuned
constants we're in the very much the
Goldilocks zone in in many ways
well
one answer is God did it it's a
supernatural God out there somewhere and
and he did it he set all the concepts of
nature to be just right so life arises
okay that's an easy to vary explanation
you know after all
which God Where's God how did God come
into existence okay it raises or it just
pushes the questions that you would have
otherwise about the universe to God and
many people say well
um God has no beginning God has no
explanation God just is well
I could easily say that about the
Universe I don't think it helps
but anyway that's one purported solution
the other purported solution is
well there's a Multiverse where all
possible constants of nature are out
there somewhere or other and so we find
ourselves in one of the universe is one
of the very very few universes where the
conscious of nature are just right
purported solution but easy to vary as
well I mean why couldn't you have all
the universes with the different
physical laws as well does it have to be
all the different concepts of nature
represented out there or just many of
the different concepts of nature that
are out there we don't know this is not
just like God a testable explanation
there's no experiment we can do to find
these other universes which is why I say
I put it in the realm of metaphysics
both of them
um
and then the third explanation I heard
well whatever the success or two and I
like this one the best whatever the
success or two
quantum theory and general relativity is
will be a theory that explains why the
constants of nature have the value they
do it will somehow turn out to be
mathematically required by the successor
Theory
now I don't know that sounds more
reasonable but we don't know like how do
we test for that we have to wait until
we've got this successor Theory or the
successes for the successful Theory
um my difficulty is
that there are scientists out there who
have a belief they profess a belief in
one of these things
well I don't think that's the right way
to go it's it's fine to say well let's
have a metaphysics and see where it goes
so Luke Barnes for example actually he's
a Christian
but but
um he does the science of exploring the
alternative metaphysical hypothesis
namely of the Multiverse of this
all these universes that have different
physical law of different physical
constants I should say different
physical constants and so you you vary
the constants you see what happens now I
think that is good metaphysics to do
good mathematics to do he'd probably be
upset and say no I'm doing physics
to what extent is that testable Here and
Now
you know the
I don't know what the experimental test
is that these other universes really do
exist in some ways I think it's but it's
important work I don't know why anyone
would get upset about being accused of
doing mathematics when they think
they're doing physics or doing
metaphysics when they think they're
doing physics one day one day we might
have the capacity to actually test these
things
but not yet not yet
um
uh Andy talks about Maslow's hierarchy
yeah
um yeah yeah but I think in the west you
know uh overall people are very high up
on that aren't they everyone's at
self-actualization when it comes to most
likes hierarchy uh and that will
continue a place I mean everyone almost
in the world is either if they're not at
self-actualization then they're at the
point of you know certainly
um uh deciding what kind of job to take
or food to take or house to have that
kind of thing there's very few people
that are right down the bottom
our observations only useful for
criticizing theories can now be useful
for creating conjectures for example by
giving a problem yes absolutely Alex is
yes you're exactly right uh those are
the two things that observations are
useful for
um the purpose of observation in science
is to
in scientists to distinguish between
theories already guessed now
that's simultaneously if it is if it's
not able to do that
it gives you a problem so when you've
got observation you cannot account for
within your current set of theories then
you've got a problem yes so it it causes
you to have conjectures which is why we
do things like astronomy and build
bigger telescopes
we're hoping to see the thing that's a
problem
as far as we know we accept that general
relativity is our description of gravity
our explanation of gravity quantum
theory is our explanation of the
behavior of matter and energy
so by looking out into space with ever
more powerful telescopes
we're not expecting that there's going
to be an observation that is going to as
you say criticize any of those theories
because there's no alternative there's
no alternative to general relativity or
quantum theory so even if we see
something
out there that's that doesn't seem to
fit with that
it doesn't criticize the theory what it
is is a problem
it's only a criticism of theory if we
had an alternative if we actually had
two theories and they're competing with
each other then an observation could be
a criticism of one
a valid criticism would be a refutation
leading us to to
choose one prefer one over the other as
the better explanation of reality
what wants to bet with me JoJo monster
says
that AGI will happen soon how can we bet
in let's say 2026 who has won the bet
um
why well absent anything else the Turing
test passed multiple times I suppose is
is what you want something like that
it's just like saying well how do you
how do you test at the next newborn baby
is actually intelligent
you've got to give it a little while
I would say at Birth or before uh you
know humans I'd say long before birth
actually
um a human is a conscious thinking
creature
uh they're they're guessing at reality
and they're beginning to explain it
inexplicitly they don't have language
yet but they would be guessing at
reality which is what it takes
for something to be a human in that way
and so the same rules apply to your AGI
the same rules of bloody age or not if
you suspect if you suspect
something is an AGI then you better
treat it exactly as you treat a baby you
better look after you've got to be
careful you better not
imprison a treat it badly switch it off
all that sort of stuff so how do we know
in exactly the same way you'd know that
a baby is sort of you you'd have to have
it learn language
and then eventually it will report
could take years
that it's self-aware that that well
self-awareness isn't the criteria right
but but if it begins to say hey I've got
you know subjective experience not in
those words but I'm hungry I'm cold I'm
frightened uh I'm having fun you know
all that sort of stuff that that
describing an internal experience then
you're in the presence of a general
intelligence of an explainer of some
kind
that's what I would say
um
nikhil how do you see the current phase
of civilization and what insights do you
find interesting
we are living through the best time ever
it will only continue to get better so
long as the forces arrayed against us
which are many don't win but they're
always in a disadvantage we are
characterized by living through a
tradition of criticism
we are still in the enlightenment David
Deutsch makes this point in the
beginning of infinity the enlightenment
is often regarded as that historical
period
back some centuries ago that
precipitated things like the Industrial
Revolution this flourishing of Science
and philosophy but in fact it never
ended and the enlightenment never ended
we're in it and we're becoming more
enlightened over time the enlightenment
continues a pace so the current phase of
civilization is The Enlightenment
um but just more it's a brighter
Enlightenment and continue to be a
brighter Enlightenment
um every year that goes by hopefully
every day that goes by
and and becoming brighter at an
increasing rate brought by the measure
of being a rational tradition of
criticism
collusion and violence rules they
um so yeah that's the phase we're in
sometimes the difficulty is that this
tradition of criticism can misfire
misfire
um Dawkins talks about how uh unusual
things that happen with biological
creatures can be a misfiring a misfiring
in a way so
um you know the the the the the the
capacity of
animals to violently defend themselves
you know that that capacity sound the
case of like baboons or something you
know they can the male baboons have a
frightening capacity for violence to
protect their family but that same
capacity can sometimes misfire causing
them to kill their own Young
misfiring well in this but but but
generally generally that that violent
tendency that strength for the baboon is
good for the species good for the family
and so on and so forth because it
protects the the baboons
and his family from you know lions and
other dangerous animals and whatever
else so it's a good thing but it can
misfire it can be turned in on itself to
cause damage in the same way a tradition
of criticism this critical capacity that
we have and in particular our
civilization has
it can be turned in on itself can
misfire and so this is what we get when
you know you have people saying of the
Enlightenment of the United States of
England of Australia that it's just a
violent Colonial patriarchy that needs
to be overthrown that capitalism is
altogether evil that that science is not
a history of dead white males trying to
control people all this sort of nonsense
is criticism of the good
so it's it's a result of criticism which
is a good thing it's a virtue but turned
in the wrong way yeah of course we
should be self-critical but it can be
overdone and misdirected and so that's
also a feature of our civilization right
now now
that that can lead to a reaction which
can be hyperbolic so we've got another
tension there then where some people on
sort of our side could turn around and
say well you know look at things like
the
um the trans movement or certain kinds
of feminism or uh so on and so forth we
really need to ramp up our defenses
against these people when these are just
mistakes these are just errors and
that's not that bad nothing is that bad
nothing is that bad uh uh despite what
social media would have us believe
okay I'm gonna have to finish up now
we'll
uh Alex will finish with Alex Alex says
an argument that minds and brains are
different is that we can simulate a mind
on a silicon computer but how do we know
the simulation won't involve explicit
representations of biological neurons
well we don't know it could be that but
what I would say is that computational
universality says it does not have to be
that that even if that is the first way
in which people produce a mind on a
silicon computer by physically
representing neurons
um that it doesn't have to be that way
there must be a way of doing it
independent of neurons there must be a
way of doing it otherwise dronlinear has
that I think a lot of people have had
this thought experiment where
a a future Neurosurgery
would enable us to do something like
well take the brain of a person a
regular human
and let's say
this is the cure for dementia what they
do is well as soon as you lose one
neuron to dementia it seems to be what
happens or an Alzheimer's what happens
replace it with electronic neuron who
knows what that looks like some sort of
little transistor and then if it happens
again replace that one and that one
another one add infinitum
so you can see where I'm going so that
if you're a place while you're on no you
wouldn't expect anything particularly
spectacular to happen your brain just
operates as normal you place another one
another one but eventually your entire
brain is it's the ship of tatus or
whatever his name is you know that that
whole idea of um you know you replace
one plank of wood on the ship is it the
same ship well eventually if you replace
all the planks of wood is at the same
ship
well the ship is an abstraction mines
are abstractions so the physical
substrate doesn't matter the the brain
might be utterly different but the mind
because put it this way
you could represent the neurons in
Silicon
but you could also
um have representations just in software
just in the software which means that
fundamentally the computation is being
done by a regular computer made of
transistors so where's the thinking
being done in the software
representation of the behavior of the
brain or in the physical transistors
well I don't know if that question makes
any sense until we have a deeper theory
of what mind is I suppose
um cool
um nikhil I'll end it here okay um uh
Curious to hear your thoughts on
modernism and post-modernism yeah well
I'm a modernist uh postmodernist a
modernist just says that well my
understanding of it is that I should say
is just some just someone who endorses
the existence of truth that says there
is a truth and we can find some of it
sometimes some Modern to say you could
find the final truth I don't say that
but and it believes in things like
objective Beauty objective morality that
kind of thing it's a modernist I think
modernist artistic movement was about
that trying to
generate
more beautiful art for example a
modernist philosophy about being
analytical and coming to a rational
understanding of reality and
post-modernism rejects all of that says
that
there isn't
an objective truth there can't be things
that are objectively beautiful or
objectively good I reject that stance I
think post-modernism is bankrupt in that
sense and self-refuting anyway after all
if we reject all truth and that anything
can be objectively true
then post-modernism is not objectively
true either and so it refutes itself
that's a lovely way to end it so um on
that until next time and I'll I'll set
it up next time so that I'm I I'll
actually promote this ahead of time it
seems my little program works
for putting things out simultaneously to
both Twitter and
um YouTube until next time bye bye
people thank you for tuning in